<article>
Captain Marvel is the name of several superheroes appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Most of the characters to use the name have been part of Marvel's main shared setting, the Marvel Universe, and most have been connected in some way to the alien Kree, either by birth or by inheriting the technology and title of the original holder of the name.

The first Marvel character to bear the name was Mar-Vell, a Kree military officer created by Stan Lee and Gene Colan who debuted in Marvel Super-Heroes #12 (December 1967). After his death in 1982, the name passed in turn to Monica Rambeau, a New Orleans harbor patrol officer; Genis-Vell and Phyla-Vell, the artificially created children of Mar-Vell; Khn'nr, a Skrull sleeper agent conditioned to believe he was Mar-Vell; Noh-Varr, a Kree from an alternate reality; and Carol Danvers, a former United States Air Force officer long known as Ms. Marvel, who has held the title since 2012.

The character has appeared in animated television, video games and the Marvel Cinematic Universe, where Carol Danvers is portrayed by Brie Larson in Captain Marvel (2019), Avengers: Endgame (2019) and The Marvels (2023), Monica Rambeau by Teyonah Parris, and Mar-Vell by Annette Bening.

== Publication history ==

The name Captain Marvel predates Marvel Comics' use of it. Fawcett Comics' Captain Marvel, created in 1939, was among the best-selling superheroes of the 1940s, but Fawcett stopped publishing the character in 1953 after a long copyright dispute with National Comics, the predecessor of DC Comics. By the mid-1960s the trademark had lapsed, and the name was briefly used by a small publisher, M.F. Enterprises, for an unrelated android character in 1966.

Marvel Comics, which had adopted its own name as a publisher in 1961, moved to secure the trademark by introducing a character of its own. Stan Lee and Gene Colan produced the Kree officer Mar-Vell in Marvel Super-Heroes #12 (December 1967), and the character received a solo title, Captain Marvel, in May 1968. The need to keep publishing under the name in order to retain the trademark has frequently been cited as a reason the company has returned to the title repeatedly, even in periods when sales were modest. When DC licensed and later purchased the Fawcett character, it was obliged to publish him under the title Shazam!, and the Fawcett hero was formally renamed Shazam in 2012.

The original Captain Marvel series ran for 21 issues before it was suspended in 1970 and relaunched in 1972 with issue #22. Roy Thomas and Gil Kane had earlier reworked the character, giving him a new costume and bonding him to Rick Jones through the Nega-Bands in Captain Marvel #17 (October 1969). Beginning with Captain Marvel #25 (March 1973), writer-artist Jim Starlin took the series in a cosmic direction, introducing the villain Thanos and granting Mar-Vell "cosmic awareness". The title ended with #62 (May 1979), and Mar-Vell's story was concluded in The Death of Captain Marvel (1982), Marvel's first graphic novel, in which the character dies of cancer.

Roger Stern and John Romita Jr. introduced a second Captain Marvel, Monica Rambeau, in The Amazing Spider-Man Annual #16 (1982). Unrelated to the Kree, she became a long-serving member and eventually leader of the Avengers during Stern's tenure on that title. She has since operated under the names Photon, Pulsar and Spectrum, and headlined one-shot specials titled Captain Marvel in 1989 and 1994.

Mar-Vell's son Genis-Vell was introduced by Ron Marz and Ron Lim in Silver Surfer Annual #6 (1993) under the name Legacy, and adopted the Captain Marvel name in a six-issue limited series written by Fabian Nicieza in 1995–1996. Peter David wrote two subsequent volumes starring Genis-Vell, running from 1999 to 2002 and from 2002 to 2004 for a combined 60 issues. David and Paul Azaceta introduced Genis-Vell's sister, Phyla-Vell, in Captain Marvel vol. 5 #16 (January 2004); she used the name briefly before taking the name Quasar in Annihilation (2006), where she fought alongside Nova (Richard Rider).

A Captain Marvel appearing to be the returned Mar-Vell was featured in Civil War: The Return (March 2007) by Paul Jenkins and in a five-issue Captain Marvel limited series by Brian Reed and Lee Weeks (2008); he was revealed in "Secret Invasion" to be the Skrull Khn'nr. Noh-Varr, created by Grant Morrison and J. G. Jones in Marvel Boy #1 (August 2000), used the name during his membership in Norman Osborn's Dark Avengers in 2009 before renaming himself Protector.

In 2012, Carol Danvers, who had been introduced as a supporting character in Captain Marvel's early stories (Marvel Super-Heroes #13, March 1968) and had been Ms. Marvel since 1977, took the title in Avenging Spider-Man #9 (July 2012) and in a new Captain Marvel series by Kelly Sue DeConnick and Dexter Soy. The series was relaunched several times during the 2010s, including a 2014 volume by DeConnick and David López, a 2016 volume written by Michele Fazekas and Tara Butters, a 2017 volume by Margaret Stohl, and a 2019 volume by Kelly Thompson that ran for 50 issues. In 2018, Stohl and Carlos Pacheco's The Life of Captain Marvel revised Danvers's origin, revealing her mother to have been Kree.

== Mar-Vell ==

Mar-Vell is a captain in the Kree Imperial Militia who is dispatched to Earth to observe humanity's progress in space exploration after the planet's encounters with the Kree Sentry and Ronan the Accuser. Posing as the recently deceased scientist Walter Lawson, he infiltrates the military base at Cape Canaveral, where he comes to sympathize with the humans he has been sent to spy on and repeatedly defies his commanding officer, Colonel Yon-Rogg, who resents Mar-Vell's relationship with the medic Una. Mar-Vell adopts a white and green uniform and is dubbed "Captain Marvel" by onlookers who mishear his name.

After being exiled to the Negative Zone, Mar-Vell is freed by Rick Jones, who dons a pair of Nega-Bands and learns that striking them together exchanges his place with Mar-Vell's, so that only one of the two can exist in the positive-matter universe at a time. In the storyline that introduces Thanos, Mar-Vell is chosen by the cosmic entity Eon to be the Protector of the Universe and gains "cosmic awareness", an expanded perception of events across space. He subsequently plays a central role in defeating Thanos during the villain's attempt to use the Cosmic Cube.

Mar-Vell eventually settles on Titan with his lover Elysius. During an earlier battle with the villain Nitro he was exposed to a nerve gas, and the exposure, aggravated by the Nega-Bands, is later found to have given him an incurable cancer. In The Death of Captain Marvel he dies in the company of Earth's superhero community, among them Spider-Man and the Avengers, with Thanos appearing to escort him into death. Several later storylines, including "Secret Invasion" and "The Thanos Imperative", have featured apparent returns of the character that were ultimately revealed to be impostors or beings from alternate realities.

== Monica Rambeau ==

Monica Rambeau is a lieutenant in the New Orleans harbor patrol who is exposed to extradimensional energy while trying to prevent the construction of a dangerous weapon. The accident gives her the ability to transform her body into any form of energy on the electromagnetic spectrum. Having been labelled "Captain Marvel" by the press, she seeks out the Fantastic Four and Spider-Man for guidance and is soon invited to train with the Avengers.

Rambeau joins the Avengers in Avengers #227 (January 1983), shortly after the court-martial of Hank Pym, and becomes the team's chairwoman in Avengers #279 (May 1987). She loses her powers and nearly dies after being transformed into living water during a battle with the sea monster Leviathan, but eventually recovers. When Genis-Vell takes the name Captain Marvel, she relinquishes it and calls herself Photon, and later Pulsar when Genis-Vell adopts the Photon name in turn. In Nextwave: Agents of H.A.T.E. (2006–2007), by Warren Ellis and Stuart Immonen, she leads a team including Elsa Bloodstone, Machine Man, Boom-Boom and the Captain against the Highest Anti-Terrorism Effort. She takes the name Spectrum in Mighty Avengers (2013) and has since served with the Ultimates and the Avengers.

== Genis-Vell ==

Genis-Vell is the son of Mar-Vell and Elysius, conceived from Mar-Vell's genetic material after his death and artificially aged to adulthood on Titan. Initially calling himself Legacy, he wears his father's Nega-Bands and, after a period as a reckless and inexperienced hero, takes the Captain Marvel name. Following the events of "Avengers Forever", he becomes bonded to Rick Jones in the same manner as his father, with each able to switch places with the other by clashing the bands.

Genis-Vell's cosmic awareness eventually drives him insane, and he destroys and recreates the universe before being restored to sanity. Wearing a new costume, he joins the Thunderbolts under the name Photon, serving alongside Radioactive Man and Songbird, but Baron Zemo discovers that Genis-Vell's resurrected body is slowly unravelling the universe and kills him by scattering pieces of his body through the Darkforce dimension in Thunderbolts #100 (May 2006). His sister Phyla-Vell, the partner of Moondragon, later takes up both the Captain Marvel name and the Quasar mantle.
</article>
