<article>
Ch'od is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by writer Chris Claremont and artist Dave Cockrum, the character first appeared in X-Men #104 (April 1977). Ch'od is a Saurid from the planet Timor and a founding member of the Starjammers, a band of space pirates led by Corsair, the father of the X-Men Cyclops and Havok. He is usually accompanied by Cr+eee, a small furred creature who serves as his companion.

== Publication history ==

Ch'od debuted alongside the other Starjammers in X-Men #104 (April 1977) during the lead-up to "The Phoenix Saga" by Chris Claremont and Dave Cockrum. He appeared sporadically in Uncanny X-Men over the following decade whenever the series moved into Shi'ar space. The character was featured in the Starjammers limited series by Warren Ellis and Carlos Pacheco in 1995, and in a second Starjammers limited series written by Kevin J. Anderson in 2004. He later appeared in the "Emperor Vulcan" and "War of Kings" storylines and in the 2014 crossover "The Trial of Jean Grey".

== Fictional character biography ==

Ch'od is enslaved by the Shi'ar Empire and held in the slave pits of the emperor D'Ken, where he meets the human Christopher Summers, the Mephitisoid Hepzibah and the cyborg Raza Longknife. The four escape together and, taking the name Starjammers, begin raiding Shi'ar shipping aboard the stolen vessel Starjammer. When the X-Men are drawn to the Shi'ar homeworld to prevent D'Ken from using the M'Kraan Crystal, Ch'od and his crewmates fight at their side, and he witnesses the power of Jean Grey as Phoenix.

The Starjammers later take in Carol Danvers, the former Ms. Marvel, after she gains the cosmic powers of Binary, and she sails with the crew for several years. Ch'od also assists Professor X and Lilandra Neramani during the Brood crisis and the civil war between Lilandra and her sister Deathbird. When Corsair is killed by his son Vulcan during the latter's seizure of the Shi'ar throne, Ch'od continues to serve under Havok, and the team is imprisoned and freed during the conflict between the Shi'ar and the Kree in "War of Kings".

In "The Trial of Jean Grey", the Starjammers join forces with the Guardians of the Galaxy, including Rocket Raccoon, to rescue the time-displaced Jean Grey from a Shi'ar tribunal. Ch'od is subsequently reunited with a resurrected Corsair.

== Powers and abilities ==

Ch'od possesses the natural attributes of his amphibious species, including superhuman strength and durability, a thick scaled hide, and the ability to breathe both air and water. He has sharp teeth and claws and considerable stamina. He is an experienced starship pilot, navigator and hand-to-hand combatant, and he uses a variety of Shi'ar energy weapons.

== In other media ==

Ch'od appears in the X-Men animated series episodes adapting "The Phoenix Saga". The character also appears in the "X-Men '97" episode "Bright Eyes" as a member of the Starjammers.
</article>
