<article>
Darkdevil (Reilly Tyne) is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character was created by writer Tom DeFalco and artist Ron Frenz and first appeared in What If (vol. 2) #105 (February 1998), the issue that introduced the MC2 imprint and Spider-Girl. He is the son of Ben Reilly, the clone of Peter Parker, and a distant cousin of Mayday Parker. Darkdevil is a grim vigilante who patrols Hell's Kitchen in a manner that deliberately recalls Daredevil, whose spirit partly inhabits him.

== Publication history ==

Darkdevil was conceived by Tom DeFalco and Ron Frenz as part of the MC2 line, an alternate future in which the children of Marvel's established heroes have taken up costumed identities. After a brief appearance in What If (vol. 2) #105, the character became a recurring supporting player in Spider-Girl, beginning with Spider-Girl #2 (November 1998). His origin was withheld for several years and was eventually told in the three-issue limited series Darkdevil #1–3 (November 2000 – January 2001), written by DeFalco with pencils by Frenz.

The character continued to appear throughout the run of Spider-Girl and its successors The Amazing Spider-Girl (2006–2009) and The Spectacular Spider-Girl (2010). He also took part in the MC2 crossover limited series Last Hero Standing (2005) and Last Planet Standing (2006).

== Fictional character biography ==

Reilly Tyne is born to Elizabeth Tyne after a short relationship with Ben Reilly, who dies before learning that he has a son. Because Reilly inherits the unstable genetic structure of a clone, he begins to suffer cellular degeneration as a teenager. Kaine, who has been secretly watching over the boy out of loyalty to Reilly's father, takes him to seek help and brings him into contact with Matt Murdock, by then a dying man.

Both are captured by a cult attempting to summon the demon Zarathos, the entity once bound to Ghost Rider. When Doctor Strange intervenes to disrupt the ritual, the demonic energy is diverted into Reilly, binding part of Zarathos to him along with the departing soul of Murdock. The merger halts his degeneration but leaves him with a demonic appearance and a divided personality in which Murdock's memories and instincts are mixed with his own.

Adopting the name Darkdevil, Reilly becomes a feared presence in Hell's Kitchen. He initially tries to drive Mayday Parker out of crimefighting, considering her a liability, but later becomes a reluctant mentor and acknowledges their family connection. He joins the second New Warriors alongside her and takes part in the fight against the Venom symbiote when it returns to New York and bonds with Normie Osborn. During "Last Planet Standing" he is among the heroes who oppose Galactus's assault on Earth.

== Powers and abilities ==

As the son of Ben Reilly, Darkdevil possesses superhuman strength, speed, agility and reflexes, as well as the ability to cling to surfaces. The fragment of Zarathos within him allows him to generate and shape hellfire, most often as flaming versions of Daredevil's billy clubs, and to teleport through shadows over short distances. He can shift between a normal human appearance and his demonic form at will.

From Matt Murdock he has inherited a radar-like perception of his surroundings and an expert command of boxing, ninjutsu and acrobatics. He is also a trained lawyer, and in his civilian identity he works at the law firm once run by Murdock.

== Reception ==

Darkdevil has been described by reviewers as one of the more distinctive creations of the MC2 imprint, with his composite origin noted as an unusual blending of several Marvel legacies.
</article>
