<article>
The Werewolf by Night (also known as the Werewolf) is a fictional character and werewolf appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character was created by writer Gerry Conway and artist Mike Ploog, working from a concept by Roy Thomas and Jean Thomas, and first appeared in Marvel Spotlight #2 (February 1972). The original Werewolf by Night is Jack Russell (born Jacob Russoff), a young man of Transylvanian descent who inherits a family curse and transforms into a wolf-like creature on the nights of the full moon. A second character to use the name, Jake Gomez, was introduced in 2020.

Jack Russell has been affiliated with several supernatural teams, including the Legion of Monsters, the Midnight Sons and the Howling Commandos. His series introduced Moon Knight, and he has appeared alongside Spider-Man, Spider-Woman (Jessica Drew), the Hulk, Morbius, Ghost Rider (Johnny Blaze), Blade, Man-Thing, Doctor Strange and Deadpool. Gael García Bernal portrayed Jack Russell in the Marvel Studios television special Werewolf by Night (2022), set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe.

== Publication history ==

The character was developed in the early 1970s, after a revision of the Comics Code Authority guidelines in 1971 permitted the depiction of werewolves, vampires and other classic horror figures that had been forbidden since 1954. Roy Thomas had proposed a werewolf feature under the title "I, Werewolf", and Stan Lee suggested the name Werewolf by Night, which had been used earlier for a short story in Marvel Tales #116 (July 1953). Gerry Conway scripted the first story and Mike Ploog provided the art. The feature ran in Marvel Spotlight #2–4 (February–June 1972) before the character received his own title.

Werewolf by Night #1 was cover-dated September 1972 and the series ran for 43 issues until March 1977. Conway and Ploog began the series, and Ploog was followed by artists including Tom Sutton and Don Perlin. Writers on the title included Len Wein, Marv Wolfman and Mike Friedrich, with Doug Moench scripting the majority of the run from issue #20 onward. The book introduced recurring supporting characters such as Jack's sister Lissa Russell, his friend Buck Cowan and the empath Topaz. Werewolf by Night #32–33 (August–September 1975), by Moench and Perlin, featured the first appearance of Moon Knight, a mercenary hired to capture the Werewolf, who went on to star in his own series. A five-issue companion title, Giant-Size Werewolf, was published from 1974 to 1975. The character also crossed over with Tomb of Dracula in Werewolf by Night #15 (March 1974) and Tomb of Dracula #18 (March 1974), and teamed with Spider-Man in Marvel Team-Up #12 (August 1973).

After his series was cancelled, the Werewolf became a member of the Legion of Monsters, a short-lived team with Man-Thing, Morbius and Ghost Rider (Johnny Blaze) that appeared in Marvel Premiere #28 (February 1976). He subsequently guest-starred in titles including Spider-Woman #32 (November 1980), which established that Jack had gained a measure of control over his transformations, and in The Incredible Hulk and Moon Knight. During the 1990s the character was revived as part of Marvel's horror line, appearing in Morbius: The Living Vampire, Ghost Rider and the "Midnight Sons" crossovers alongside Blade, Doctor Strange and Jericho Drumm, and starring in a backup feature in Marvel Comics Presents #54–59 (1990).

A six-issue Werewolf by Night series written by Paul Jenkins and illustrated by Leonardo Manco was published from February to July 1998 as part of the "Strange Tales" revival; it was cancelled with the rest of the line, and its story concluded in Strange Tales #1–2 (September–October 1998). Jack Russell later appeared in the 2006 Blade series, the 2007 one-shot Legion of Monsters: Werewolf by Night, and the four-issue Dead of Night Featuring Werewolf by Night (2009), a MAX imprint miniseries by Duane Swierczynski and Mico Suayan. He was a member of the Howling Commandos in Nick Fury's Howling Commandos (2005–2006) and of the Legion of Monsters in the 2011–2012 miniseries by Dennis Hopeless and Juan Doe, and appeared in Marvel Zombies 3 and Marvel Zombies 4 with Morbius, Man-Thing and Jennifer Kale.

In 2020 Marvel introduced a new Werewolf by Night, Jake Gomez, a Hopi teenager, in a four-issue miniseries written by Taboo of the Black Eyed Peas and Benjamin Jackendoff with art by Scot Eaton. Jack Russell returned in the 2023 one-shot Werewolf by Night by Derek Landy and Fran Galán, released to coincide with the television special, and in the four-issue Werewolf by Night: Red Band (2024) by Jason Loo and Sergio Dávila, which paired him with John Jameson (Man-Wolf).

== Fictional character biography ==

Jacob Russoff is born in Mediaș, Transylvania, to Gregor Russoff and his American wife Laura. The Russoff line has carried a lycanthropic curse since the 18th century, when Jacob's ancestor Grigori Russoff killed Dracula and was attacked by a werewolf in retaliation; the curse was later bound to the family by the Darkhold, an ancient grimoire of black magic that Gregor keeps in Castle Russoff. Gregor is killed by villagers while transformed, and Laura flees to the United States with Jacob and his younger sister Lissa, where she marries Philip Russell and anglicizes the children's names to Jack and Lissa Russell.

On his eighteenth birthday Jack undergoes his first transformation into a werewolf, a condition that recurs for the three nights of each full moon and over which he initially has no control or memory. Shortly afterward his mother is fatally injured in a car crash arranged by Philip Russell's chauffeur, Max Grant, on behalf of a criminal organization known as the Committee. Before dying, Laura tells Jack about his heritage. Jack wrongly suspects his stepfather of the murder and spends the early part of his career drifting through Los Angeles, trying to hide his condition from Lissa while the Committee repeatedly attempts to capture and exploit the Werewolf.

Jack befriends the writer Buck Cowan, who becomes his confidant, and gains an ally in Topaz, a young woman with empathic abilities who is able to calm the Werewolf. He travels to Transylvania in search of the Darkhold in hopes of lifting the curse, and clashes with Dracula, who has taken up residence in the Russoff ancestral home. He fights opponents such as the sorcerer Taboo, the Hangman, Tatterdemalion and the Committee's agents, and crosses paths with Spider-Man, Frankenstein's Monster and Morbius. When Lissa reaches her own eighteenth birthday and begins to transform, Jack and Topaz, with the aid of Doctor Glitternight's enemies, are able to free her from the curse, though Jack himself remains afflicted.

The Committee hires the mercenary Marc Spector, operating as Moon Knight, to capture the Werewolf. Spector subdues Jack but, after learning the Committee's intentions, releases him and turns against his employers. Jack later joins forces with Man-Thing, Morbius and Ghost Rider (Johnny Blaze) as the Legion of Monsters in a brief alliance against a being called Starseed. Over time, and with the help of the sorcerer Belaric Marcosa's defeat and a ritual performed with Doctor Strange, Jack gains the ability to transform at will and to retain his human intellect while in wolf form, though he continues to change involuntarily under the full moon.

In the 1990s Jack is drawn into the conflict with the demon-mother Lilith and her Lilin, operating alongside the Midnight Sons, including Morbius, Blade, Ghost Rider and Jericho Drumm. He is later captured by the cult of the Order of the Tyrant and transformed into a more feral state before regaining his faculties. He subsequently serves with the Howling Commandos, a S.H.I.E.L.D. unit of supernatural operatives, and reunites with Morbius, Man-Thing and other monsters as the Legion of Monsters, who protect a hidden refuge for monsters beneath New York City known as Monster Metropolis. During this period he allies with Deadpool and clashes with the Hulk and Moon Knight, and encounters Spider-Woman (Jessica Drew), who had earlier helped him regain control of the Werewolf.
</article>
